break the law in Ohio and you go to a
prison like Ross break the rules on the
inside and you're going to the big house
Lucasfilm when you come here you've
already gotten cut with your prison now
you go have one have a escorts good
let's go walk for one year National
Geographic followed the lives of inmates
and officers in the state of Ohio it's a
system bent on making inmates better
filled with convicted felons who might
already be worse out of my face this is
a year of hard time
[Music]
does everyone know North side's been
locked down the last couple days
we had an inmate that was stabbed three
times in the neck
you come running off the yard staff
responded immediately and started
shaking down the north yard and in that
shakedown you know we come up with 15
additional shanks so very alarming
[Applause]
it's been a long hot summer at Ross
Correctional Institution in southern
Ohio inmate fights
assaults on staff drug smuggling all
seem to be on the rise and the north
side home to some of the toughest
inmates in the state is ground zero for
trouble
[Music]
well alright pops off in our block about
30 of us going at it filled up the whole
range Swan and hood right face
Oh work art the prison response has been
Swift divide off the door over the last
couple of weeks we've found just a lot
of tension in this part of the compound
and add all these together the potential
if this gets bigger could be huge
[Music]
now the Northside is on lockdown one of
the most potent tools a warden can use
to control the inmate population a
dramatic step in restoring order
three days have gone by enough time to
gradually ease the restrictions there's
movement on the yard again but tensions
remain it can go from normal like this
often right now too dangerous in seconds
in here in seconds playing cards at the
table I say some on my mouth and you say
something back now we both ate each
other's throat only gonna kill each
other
and once action the Aryan Brotherhood
has been getting special attention
extortions attacks on inmates and
attacks on staff carried out by a group
considered a security threat by the
system
with members like William sounds I'm a a
god man they'll never break my spirits
to phone that what you do is break me
that's what they want a whole bunch of
zombies to walk around here scared to
death of them
I'll never known it's not so I had me
fear no man but myself that's what I
fear myself
Samms aka Bulldog is on his way to a
segregation unit already crowded with
recent troublemakers and the assault on
a police officer
Bulldog got into an argument with an
officer that escalated into an assault
get in there and he's like a he's
barking what tell him to do so me do it
I'm sick and you skinhead not so that's
good he said what I said I'm not a
skinhead you know and any guy I guess he
got a little mad and before he know
what's happening it's too late man
do what you got to do cuz I'm gonna do
it I got to do and I'm gonna stand on
these two feet and regardless of where
I'm at or who it's against you
disrespect me - put your hands on me and
there's no more there's no more
boundaries dude I'm not Jesus Jesus on
the other cheek I mean butovo you hit me
I'm gonna tear your ass up
[Music]
just like on the street the Ohio prison
system has laws rules of conduct that
can't be broken
and the Bulldog is found guilty of these
new charges he'll earn a trip to the
jail within the prison system known
simply as Lucasville
[Music]
[Applause]
the reputation Lucas bill is dangerous
they're just hardcore inmates staffed or
killed in these other places or those
are real serious that's where everybody
goes to
in fact zoomin through that's exactly
what it's like
you see the man was caged - it's exactly
what the eldest
oh fuck
[Music]
some guys being back there man for years
they stay ballooning man
most of people there is never getting
out never getting out
so what the hell do they care about
killing yeah I mean don't mean nothing
[Music]
the southern Ohio correctional facility
opened in 1972
back then the design was
state-of-the-art a pattern of modules
formed into a shape that resembles a
telephone pole
[Music]
each module J block K and L connects to
the main cord 22 acres under one roof
housing fourteen hundred and fifty
inmates who've earned their ride here
every inmate has broken the rules many
have even committed new crimes behind
bars it's a fact of life in Ohio's
toughest prison one that keeps major
David Warren on the move and I was just
in there fighting dude all I know is
that I got here from the sack and all
I'm saying is that if even was a field
or another inmate
why am I going to the hole I feel like I
got to do some to somebody to hurt on
the something like that I'm gonna let it
be known so when they do take place they
all did hear hear that it was nice
seeing them say amazing
understand it's just something about the
mentality of the MA that comes into
lucasville they feel like they have to
earn a reputation or something you're
getting gained individuals that are at
low point ovh their most frustrated
hostile understandable to justify taking
art privileges and giving food to the
guy that you're punished
you're on the list you'll get out of
here as soon as I get it so it's crazy
man there's guys have been back here at
a 4b Boshart I don't know how many years
you know years plural though it's not
house man you're locked down 23 hours a
day you hear you're stuck behind the
goddamn this big this little steel box
[Music]
that lucasville any freedom of movement
has exploited and the fights come hard
and fast the prison has more attacks on
inmates and staff than any other
facility in the state 400 incidents and
Counting in 2010 alone and some
confrontations are extreme like this one
involving an inmate armed with a spray
bottle filled with feces and urine allow
me to do my job and in law staff do
their job quick all right and after any
event it's up to the major to follow up
to make sure that the punishment is
proper and everything is by-the-book
stall Joe hey you have spray bottle and
you continue to try to spray my staff
with feces and urine and you continue to
refuse to cuff up so we had no
alternative but to extract you at that
point we had every opportunity to come
out correct once they come into town
this year I know it is me what about the
shampoo bottle you had told faces and
urine that you sprayed on my stink at
Ross Correctional Institution Bulldog is
headed to prison court and a rules
infraction Board hearing how you wish to
clear this rule for violation in my
gluten I'm never gonna plead guilty they
could catch me with it in my hand
is it not guilty I know the rules a game
and they got eight hours to catch me I
got 24 hours to beat him tell us about
this kind of report sentence I mean just
so I mean I didn't touch them at all so
at no time you construct this officer
I'm sorry they took pictures of my hands
they took pictures of him I guess I
don't know why I didn't touch that at
all okay well I'm looking at the metal
cook exam that's wrong
him and then Shawn in her braise into
his facial area also I mean I didn't
touch them in these hearings play out
daily throughout the prison system in
Ohio and just like in the civilian court
inmates call witnesses Tommy says state
up come with me start screaming hit me
hit me and then a tiny comes running up
out the back and the autonomy I see no
wrong sorry but under cross-examination
Bulldogs defense starts to crumble II in
no time you seen that they have so that
happened no they're not
I did not Adam Todd Trudy 509 631 could
you tell us a little bit about this
Condor pport or if you know or
witnessing against um I don't want to
make any statements please
one of my witnesses came in he's a
little bit you know mean he's got no
horn I got no respect for do them or
whatever you know I mean it is what it
is you stated that you didn't touch the
officer our butter was we believe is
correct officer bulldog is found guilty
it is a verdict that puts in one step
closer to a transfer one step closer to
lucasville and a radical change in the
way you'll do time
coming into this setting it's you know
pretty overwhelming
when they step off the bus they see our
presence and they see us not magnetic
it's not an issue where we're trying to
be much their heart adjust the way it is
we want to let them know when they call
the bus this is our prison and when you
come here you've already gotten trouble
with your prison that you've learned out
of a transfer day at the southern Ohio
Correctional Facility in lucasville
seven inmates are arriving from Lebanon
Correctional Institution new ones you
see their eyes so they walk on that like
now at the big house they have all
broken the rules of the system and for
it have been sent here to serve jail
time of sorts entering a new world in
doing time
one call great exposure evaluation per
round bond your feet
yep yep one call your dress intake at
Lucasville is the inmates first taste of
maximum security and with it the loss of
the relative comforts of general
population
hey can I help with a handle they can't
have a search power cord they can't have
local search the stuff like this they
can't have you take a blanket for the
teacher and have either one of those any
item of any color not issued or
sanctioned is put in storage I heard if
I'm a person now nine years my life
there got chopped down pretty good
do you hear a lot of stuff about Lu like
Luke is the big talk of all prisons so
you're coming up if you're like I'm
going to do this I'm never going to get
out and like it up here someone stabbing
you know stuff but that's what you're
thinking so yes ro Glenn Chasteen is
just 22 years old but is already a
veteran to Ohio system entering the
sixth year of his sentence for armed
robbery
yeah John Kepler graduation party and
why do have a gun we just went out Ralph
somebody like just on a wire his drunk
I'm gonna end up taking out for it cuz I
was a juvenile that I'm only 17
I still want to do a lot of a lot of
things I miss that young people do like
having ever been to a club I've never
been to a strip club I've never been to
a bar after ten o'clock you know if I
would have never been to anything you
need a ID over 18 at Lucasville
it's not about the crime that got you to
prison it's about the rules you broke
once inside
in April 2010 Chasteen was charged with
possession of a deadly weapon a 12 inch
shank he was sentenced to six months in
the hole arrays in his security level
and with it
a trip to lucasville all over a charge
he claims was about loyalty about
protecting his cellmate how dude all you
had a nice case and I knew if you had
another one he's going down smoking to
end up here and he had to see the parole
board again so you know I may have stuff
that's like that's a little stuff that
you do now you know I'm coming here for
[Music]
Lucas villas Glenshaw steams fourth
prison and five years step on it and it
also may be his last
he has just nine months left before his
release time that just got harder
lucasville is at capacity so tonight all
seven of the new arrivals are placed in
temporary cells and the prison's
toughest tier j2 segregation the hole at
Lucasville he'd probably do my little
nine-month until if I get hit somebody
throw something on me I'm kind of
ridiculous
I don't know Roman do almost all of
world items I'm all about the title I'm
not trying to kick it with too many
people Chasteen is at the beginning of a
journey every inmate takes at Lucasville
new arrivals are classified as four-beat
a designation that typically means up to
a year and strict confinement the whole
for the entire state with limited
privileges and little movement break the
rules in the clock I'm leaving for B
resets toe the line and move to level
four a and a chance to leave lucasville
it's rigid control dictated by the kind
of inmates who come here and overseen by
warden Donald Morgan every facility
you'll have one percent of the offenders
that do not want to follow policy and
procedure they disrupt the normal
operations of that institution at a
little altercation up here essentially
Luke's bills made up of everybody's 1%
and gives me a total of a hundred
percent of your inmates that does not
want to follow the rules regulation at a
level 4 facility we control every
movement of an offender
every where an offender goes his
movements are under constant security
supervision it's discipline and control
that translates to the hardest time an
inmate will face in Ohio but even in a
prison as locked down as lucasville
trouble is always just around the corner
[Music]
on L side a signal tree alert has been
called two inmates are fighting on range
the punches thrown as they were coming
back from wreck
during the precious few seconds before
they were locked back to their selves
fights like this happen almost every day
here and are often met with mace rock
you become that guy rocks okay huh first
bad huh - gorgeous
hold on good let's go you want to be on
guard and you never want to turn your
backs to offenders and in any facility
expecially lucasville the assault is
just the start of a process of reporting
an Intel gathering a paper trail that
each incident sets off so this is all
one incident right here I'll find out
[Music]
there's no time to wait you do it now
and get it done some else is right
around the corner
so you can't really stop the operations
of the institution you had to keep it
from you how to keep it slow it's Lucas
took Spain it's a unique Beach that's
all I can say
[Music]
at the Ross Correctional Institution
Bulldog has been found guilty in prison
court of attacking an officer one of the
most serious offenses behind bars now
the administration may raise a security
level to for beef and ride him out to
Lucasville
would be your transfer hearing today we
started as a 4b hearing will see whether
we finishes in the 4b or finishes the
level 3 today's hearing is about
determining whether bulldogs actions
make him a security threat and the
numbers he's accumulated on his prison
rap sheet are already working against
him first already finding by all our IB
I'd say yes two points local control
placement within the last 12 months of
which you're currently in as local
control so you get three for that and
then those weeks of violence indicator
that was your rule for so with that tell
us why you think you should or should
not be placed in level four B all this
happened and I can mean a span of six
seven months but there's only one real
severe choice here was a rule for word
in order to be considered for level four
B you have to meet at least one of these
eight criteria I'll give you copy this
you've met three of the three of the
eight you only have to meet the one I am
going to make the recommendation level
for B mr. Stanley with that you have a
right to appeal this as a waste of time
no appeal no all right you know what you
got coming with me there's a certain
line going across and you got to watch
that line because it touch it
it doesn't matter who you are I'm going
to flare up on the period if the
Selective process how you guys choose
who you get for me to do is to have ten
twelve points with Jews and Locke and
you know get caught in homosexual
activity or whatever whatever they do
but I mean I beat up a co but then I'm a
bad guy I don't bar that I'll come back
and get them again
you've earned another conduct report and
then you don't
alright five right five more for threats
okay okay we're done right ten take it
send one of them to my mom tell us that
I love it
you need a pen I think I can find you a
pen right there take it with thanks I
got my
[Music]
and I do eat my his best fat me to get
me out of here as fast as he can
I don't care about going home I don't
care about hunger that man you're gonna
respect me but you got that shirt on or
not you're going to respect me man I
demand respect and that's what I do you
know I mean let's let's gas the bus off
40 miles to the south
it's day two of Glenn castings time at
Lucasville and this morning he's on the
move
headed out of his temporary cell and
segregation to confront his new home
and prison face is everything an image
in here is almost more important than
anything on the street Chasteen is
moving into unit cave for a 4b block
where inmates are held on 23 hour
lockdown
[Music]
the noise the worst thing they don't
ever shut up while you're sleeping will
be very cocking warning so we screaming
yelling inmates call the yelling cell
banging and newcomers like Chasteen draw
media attention don't think I can better
to do your board into anybody feed off
me I'd run around you thinking yellow
bathing normal or another loser
they got my heart away they don't they
don't budge
there's two worlds here in new Brazil's
are for V and for a first you got to
make it on a four beat when you get here
the nine months and for B and it was
horrible I couldn't stand it they don't
have phones all day John Shearer has
been at Lucasville for more than a year
and has made his way into for a where
he's earned the nickname cheese for his
ever-present smile I'm always been the
special person I'm John Shearer is
serving a ten year sentence for
involuntary manslaughter and aggravated
robbery part of an ongoing life as a
criminal running in drug circles he's at
Lucasville for continuing that life
behind bars accused of being the
mastermind behind a prison drug ring
they put down the cafe in char's only
when they I didn't actually I had no
drugs on me or nothing so what they
still made is big I mean I've been
involved in some drug some drug drinks
and you know some fights and group
fights and all that and allegations been
on me that people got hurt from for you
know telling on me beef in the past they
just work at Lucasville
here is a porter delivering juice and
meals and K block what's up with you man
you good a plum job for a hustler now
back in a world dis restrictive porters
who choose to get in the game are at the
heart of a covert network that moves
contraband throughout the prison
anything with wheels can transport
trouble lunch wagons metal tray boxes
even dumpsters moves through the inmates
we move everything we get around all
that any Port Authority and even in a
block
you know we charge people to run
anything it's all about money Shearer
seems to reap the benefits in a world of
limited possessions he's a wealthy man
but in prison wealth can be dangerous
the lucasville prison that stands today
is a serious place imposing dark
engulfed in shadow the shadows are
reminders of the prison's darkest days
April 1993 Easter Sunday and mates take
control of el bloque eight officers are
held hostage
we are oppressed people we have come
together as one we are brothers we are
very oppressed and we're very sick of it
we're not going to take this anymore we
are not going to bow down we are not
going to give up we are going to remain
no matter what they put on us if we die
we die
within days nine inmates are killed by
the rioters one officer is murdered his
body deposited on the yard we hope there
is no more violence we hope there are no
more unnecessary murders but that is
something that had to happen a lot of us
didn't want it but that's I'm sorry
that's all I can say this is the first
hostage that we can see that is coming
out
these fellows coming on now appear to be
the ones we have been waiting for that's
a wonderful side right there the second
hostage coming out right now when the
siege ends el bloque is in ruins
lucasville is in ruins
it truly shook us to the court everybody
in the agency rethought what they were
doing the riot is the formative moment
in Ohio Corrections one that resonates
daily from the office of director
Ernie Moore to the halls of the prison
itself and in its wake lucasville
undergoes radical changes secure
enclosures are built to protect officers
on the tears automated crash gates break
up the corridors
inmates move through the halls in groups
of 20 and the department is called the
Oh DRC a system built around an
organizing principle rehabilitation
we're not going to give up hope on
public safety that's our mission that's
what we're going to continue to do and
we're not going to give up hope on
rehabilitation without a prison like
lucasville for every inmate has broken
the rules of the system that
rehabilitation starts with control
top-ranked place today level 4b inmates
are getting rec for 12 hours each day
single file lines had to and from the
outdoor cages a lockdown chain-linked
playground of sorts for inmates are kept
in segregated units but even with the
rigid control fights are still common
equally violent it can be very violent
we've got guys that can actually
dislocate your thumbs and come up all
them handcuffs we've got guys that that
you wouldn't think normally can break a
set of handcuffs and can twist them and
slap them in a heartbeat what'd I tell
you from the get-go already today
another fight is broken out we gotta
shut the block down when an inmate tried
to headbutt another on the REC chain the
incident is quickly handled and the
inmate is removed
we're al-faisal all day every day you
know it's only something different you
know what
[Applause]
wreck on the other side of the compound
is a very different affair where for a
inmates like John here have earned a bit
more freedom Shearer gets an hour of
record day time he devotes to his real
hustle gambling
[Music]
he runs a highly profitable sports book
in K block he's the bank the go-to man
for betting on football games it's
probably one of the biggest game in the
places there is just for the simple fact
that we're locked down all the in guys
we're bored so I mean in the weekend you
want to play it taking have you
something to do I mean why not play a
couple bucks on the ticket out on the
yard Shearer is on the move and football
action isn't every conversation around
that game on TV that what's between you
game what's on Channel eight or 7:30
money do come back nine yeah oh wait
forces all - pucllana swinging those
shears man on the inside is John
McAllister nicknamed slug short for
Slugger hey what was that dude 48 to 54
slug is the booking the keeper of the
point spreads stat sheets and the bets a
one man one sell vegas-style sports book
what's of it it's all I do all day every
day is I read the sports page sports
magazines now I'm not a guru but I know
how to make some educated guesses will
pick which games that we want to put on
the ticket and uh and once once we get
up we get we get jacket lines of jacket
lines down a little bitch in automated
do towards where wherever we feel
comfortable the line is the amount of
points by which one team is expected to
beat the other
over there inmates who take the points
are gambling to beat the odds McAllister
is about to set what's up baby
for those who lose and don't pay up the
price is steep as some things you just
can't do when you can't let a man just
take take something that belongs to you
the guy refuses to take to take you up
and I mean I'm gonna blow your mouth out
I mean just as I am it's just business
that's all it is I saw everything I do
in the joint is business
now you may go over there right now for
a hustle like this to succeed timing is
critical especially in a prison like
Lucasville
McAllister's betting line is set and
delivered just in time for share to
report for work
now he can take in the bets and build up
a bank before Saturday game day this
easily make money off them tickets a
pipe pulling $250 a week maybe 200 bucks
a weekend maybe payout sometimes you get
hit from 100 150 sometimes gave away
more sometimes you won't get hit at all
so that's profit we hit the gems first
of all each and every adult the prison
works daily to disrupt the hustles with
large-scale shakedowns when the Intel is
good main thing we're looking for people
is drugs and actually any major
contraband weapons cellphones or
anything like that nature today the
major has brought in dogs in the
sheriff's office and is headed on a
search develop around push hangs on
Walters direct and forceful shakedowns
at Lucasville target the players in the
game
take it those that reap the benefits
laid out there like john sheer hell yeah
so you see they was in it was in here
most definitely they was in here all my
straight before when I left it always is
I usually keep it neat stale you're not
a fan
with gameday approaching and the bets
coming in it appears as if Shearer is on
the prison's radar the prison known as
lucasville when Chasteen is settling in
radio just two weeks into his time on K
block he's getting into the game
[Music]
starting to hustle by playing cards for
commissary bets are paid off instantly
and the flurry of winnings and losses
fished from one cell to the next is
constant that's really all this is extra
you don't need it you just inside of the
page that you want any type of helpful
and prison against rules for real so
anything you do to hopefully get you in
trouble it's all part of the underground
economy one that Chasteen is falling
deeper into
hustles come in all forms inside of
prison even one is locked down as
lucasville double-a batteries take the
bread tight tick tock croc bandit up and
then stick them both together and when
they connect they get hot it in then you
have a pound heart set on the drill and
you put butter on the grill get the
tails from border then just throw them
on the grill jailhouse cooks take orders
from the block left that's like a real
private ale and sell their dishes for
cookies coffees and so hey right right
there goes the greatest drop it's one
way to hustle then you know sometimes
you got to make money
I know here's the policeman I not tell
by semina month across camp and unit k-6
Jean McCallister's hustle was heating up
it's game day and he's busy fishing
through his window to other cells around
his block taking in last minute bets on
his football tickets Oh window cookies
went to him hey Troy you got that come
on ma with no hard currency commissary
items make up the beds and McCallister's
room is filling with the wagers for the
day
I've got hurry up my name I've been that
office program it's hectic man it's time
for so many in fact that you got a duck
the rollers because they do the other
rounds every 15 minutes the bets are
laid and downstairs the money man's job
is done
all that remains are the results so john
shear has settled in for a nap as the
games get underway goddamn ball Oklahoma
Arkansas a 25
yes what's over
Oh
Laura's up 24 right now that means that
uh everybody that took South Florida
which was uh almost half the block they
all go down smoking as the day wears on
the results keep coming in and going
their way
bang-bang they all go down thank you for
your donations come again downstairs
it's time for work for sure he's headed
back to his Porter job with one last
piece of business to distribute the
lines for the late games but today comes
with an unwelcome surprise a
strip-search on the way over
I will hit the strip sorry time to wait
[Music]
good the hillbillies net sure gets
through the line hidden in his mouth I'm
always going to be involved man I mean
if it's just something little man I
don't know what it is it's Who I am the
keys my spirits going to achieve
nobility in the building - every good
day man walks always good at mine I'm a
shaker monomial so I got to make it
happen ad got to make it happen at Ross
Correctional Institution Bulldog is
entering his sixth week in the hole
after assaulting an officer
a serious offense behind bars and one
that has consequences word has just come
down bulldogs headed to lucasville what
would be a punishment for most though is
a homecoming of sorts for an Aryan
brother like Bulldog that's our house
man
I mean that's that's the Food Network
that's where we go there's so many of us
there that anywhere you go you're going
to have five or ten or y'all in the same
area at all times
bone bone everybody so it's great good
times
and you know Lucas deals got its own
personality
it doesn't matter what you're going to
get joint then it's about how you carry
yourself once you're already in the
joint I mean that place Rob's on
reputation and sizes on
[Music]
sometimes I'll sit in there and think
about it you know like uh I don't know
if Lucas does the right place like to
this sauce you know it don't suck it's
emotionally and mentally challenging
place man it takes away a part of you
that you will never want to lose right I
mean that shine and it does that because
it makes you rough it makes you you know
I mean you're arrogant and angry all the
time
no that's why I try to smile as much as
possible around and goof off because if
you lose that party then it's delightful
you only get one shot
[Music]
and so lately
once you've got a reputation my mind
once you get so happy when
administration get to worrying about you
and you got a problem I mean it's gonna
follow you you try to go straight and
still it I mean it doesn't matter if you
go straight because they're always going
to be looking for that they're always
going to be looking for you to be
involved in something I'm pretty much
once you once you get in so far so deep
it's not going to stop that's what it's
going to be
when you get out there on the range and
you talk the same you open yourself up
to anything me and here is not the same
me on the street like I daydream elijan
saying oh you hear you daydream I'm
getting out and when I do I still think
of myself acting like the way I do now
like I don't know
[Music]
it might've changed me permanently I
don't know
[Music]
it's just another day at the prison
known as lucasville Chow continues to
run
the red chains are cycling
and in back the bus is pulling up with
another fresh arrival
Bulldog is coming home
[Music]
yes there has to be a thought and I
respect that to an extent but I'm not
going to live my life based on someone
else you got it ever ever no this is not
happening
I made some mistakes they caused me to
be behind the wire but it doesn't change
the fact that I know I'm a free spirit
man I'm gonna do what I want to do these
things right here but we're not holding
they can't stop me there's no weakness
in me you know like if you see a pack of
wolves and you see one that's hurt they
get him out of the factories leak and I
mean just strengthen package of wolf
[Music]
so what they do they cut it loose you'll
never get that with me nothing
you never know another of the welcome
for be gentle a tandem on today Aaron
never any process though is round two
[Applause]
yeah
[Music]